---
title: Thoreau, Taxes, and Techno-Optimism
created: 2025-02-08
published: 2025-03-19
tags:
  - essays
  - thoreau
  - politics
permalink: /thoreau-1
top_of_mind: "false"
memorable phrases: Peaceable revolution, Civil disobedience
---
> When I meet a government which says to me, "Your money or your life," why should I be in haste to give it my money? It may be in a great strait, and not know what to do: I cannot help that. It must help itself; do as I do.

I recently read Thoreau's Civil Disobedience alongside Claude in my book club of two[^5]. I was prompted to dust off Thoreau's essay from my shelf, whilst attempting to read [Critical Art Ensemble](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_Art_Ensemble)'s [Electronic Civil Disobedience](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_civil_disobedience)[^6] in a noisy pub but got sidetracked into a more interesting Claude chat which helped me decide that, perhaps, going to the source would be a better starting point. Prior to reading the essay, I wondered if Thoreauvian disobedience differed from Gandhi's civil disobedience movement. I learned that [Gandhi had disputed being inspired by Thoreau](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satyagraha#:~:text=The%20statement%20that%20I%20had%20derived%20my%20idea%20of%20civil%20disobedience%20from%20the%20writings%20of%20Thoreau%20is%20wrong.) but the shared principle of non-cooperation seems, to me, unquestionable; the main difference appears to be that Thoreau's was an individual's action whereas Gandhi's scales to groups. Both remain relevant today in developing a peaceful, non-violent, and non-disruptive[^17] non-cooperation. The essay is timeless and I recommend everyone read it.
# Thoreau
Thoreau's use of [_civil_ does not imply _civility_ in one's acts of disobedience](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/civil-disobedience/) but is the disobedience of a [civil society](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil_society) towards unjust government. Very early in the essay it becomes clear that non-violence is fundamental to Thoreau given his anti-war posture[^1]  and identification as an abolitionist. In fact, these lawfully permitted violent actions are the foundational reasons for his disobedience to the American government, finding their perpetuation of war and chattel slavery[^7] as unconscionable. Very early, the reader can do little else but agree that elected governments should not be presumed as *de facto* just- strength in numbers doesn't automatically imply fairness, it's merely consensus. His observation of a majority-elected ruling government not protecting its minority members, comprising slaves and abolitionists, and, in fact, seeking out to hurt them teases out how such systems are distinct from moral ones.

> A corporation has no conscience; but a corporation of conscientious men is a corporation with a conscience.

Like Thoreau, I also believe that morally right decisions, either by individuals or groups, can be reached by using conscience as a compass and almost certainly not by majority[^9]; anyone with a sense of what is good and right would not, for example, turn a blind eye to the plight of slaves. Refusal to pay his taxes to an unjust government was Thoreau's demonstration of his conscience governing his decisions while also opposing the government's lack of one. Isolating himself from his tax-paying neighbours, Thoreau's words below precurse the more famous Woody Allen one.

> I, Henry Thoreau, do not wish to be regarded as a member of any incorporated society which I have not joined.

His action to not pay his taxes poses an interesting thought experiment today when individuals earning a wage, in most cases[^10], cannot simply opt out of paying income tax (at least not in America or much of the West). The difference between the eras is that Thoreau could withhold taxes from the government whereas our taxes are withheld by the employers for the government[^19]. For these reasons, people find Thoreau's essay dated[^14]. But to this crowd, I countenance that the problem of unjust governments lingers even if the mode of individual protest seems invalid. In fact, the precise things he found unjust are indisputably part of today's system as there are standing militaries and much fighting across states which, much like in Thoreau's times, are supported by our taxes. This is why I find Thoreau's essay timeless, even if his strategy is not.
# Technology in Modern Civil Disobedience
 later, we enter Gandhi's era of disobedience. Then, it was still possible to do the same as Thoreau as the technology of money hadn't yet undergone the radical electronic transformation commonplace today. So, taxes were personally or manually collected and not electronically withheld as done today.

This led me to wonder (as I have before reading this essay, too) what a Thoreauvian civil disobedience today might look like- my first take remains that it's fundamentally impossible to demonstrate your individual disagreement with your government in a non-cooperative and simultaneously non-violent Thoreauvian spirit. Why? It is the current nature of how intertwined governments and technology companies, across finance and media, are. The technology of electronic money is one thing that diminishes the possibility of individual Thoreauvian protest but our mass manipulation, especially during elections, has been enabled through online digital and social media. The companies providing these media platforms have coffers[^11] and demographics[^12] comparable to nation states and thus work with them; they informally govern our digital lives with their own rules and regulations [while shepherding us in elections, without most of our realisation](https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2020/1/18/cambridge-analytica-and-the-end-of-elections)- this has undoubtedly compromised the election process. These companies are more powerful than their platform's individual users as well as the governments as they maintain critical infrastructure for global communications, commerce, and information flow that rivals or exceeds what many nations can provide. These tool-makers [share offices with to influence decision-making in government](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cgrw785585wo) leading to, as I see it, a two-party system of governance, a multivariable calculus that Thoreau didn't have to contend with. I call this intertwined two-party system an **oligotechnodemocracy**. While the term is a mouthful, I choose to use word this for its neutral tone when compared to kleptocracy and oligarchy which do not sufficiently capture the central role of today's technology in creating new power/governance structures while also missing our collective choice in enabling organisations and individuals to accumulate power.

It appears to me that people are now starting to realise this with every passing election and is, perhaps, why we are seeing their discontent manifest into unconscionable violent acts of torching and defacing of Teslas across America and Europe by civilians. Such protests are a form of resistance but unaligned with Thoreau's civil disobedience. While I am critical of such means of expressing discontent, Thoreau is critical of organised protests for different reasons. His refusal to pay taxes was a form of protest not merely in opposition to government but also to every member of civil society that did not take a more thoughtful action- none moreso than those who paid his dues, alongside their own, to the tax collector to keep Thoreau out of prison[^18].

> Those who, while they disapprove of the character and measures of a government, yield to it their allegiance and support are undoubtedly its most conscientious supporters, and so frequently the most serious obstacles to reform.

It's hard to disagree with Thoreau that we are complicit in the unjust actions of government. I have similarly questioned the mindfulness of my protester friends previously, who organise en masse to express their dismay while collectively participating in elections and tax-paying. Clearly they do not see their own role in perpetuating the idea that central governance is needed and, by extension, so is an army. If one feels so strongly, then some new mechanism must be invented, by the upset individual/group, to wilfully disengage from this machine. I do not share their view that (potentially violent) protests in the town square are radical or effective- if anything, such protests will continue to be used as further justification by government to strengthen a police force (which redirects taxes that might have gone somewhere more useful) to keep its citizens in check while working with (or forcing) technology companies to persistently surveil its citizens. If anything, this protester group plays into the hands of this two-party system; their taxes are merely buying them permission to protest in a manner that the government will deem acceptable. While I have no answer to the exact form an appropriate reaction to today's unjustness may take, I only know that its nature must be conscionable and non-violent. Ideas of direct action groups and decentralised governance might offer other pathways of political action; David Graeber talks about this [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqfoJvD0Ifg&t=5s) though I am not versed enough here to know of its viability. My sense, at this time, is that Thoreauvian individual action is possible against technology companies so we engage more mindfully online. Whereas, we must find other ways to influence government through a co-ordinated action.

> Absolutely speaking, the more money, the less virtue.

Littered with many quotables, this pithy one stands out for it will remain timelessly true- so much so that it could belong in the _Tao Te Ching_. Bernie Sanders has [repeated](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2019/jul/03/bernie-sanders/bernie-sanders-target-saying-3-richest-have-much-w/) that [the 3 richest have as much wealth as bottom half of all Americans](https://www.sanders.senate.gov/press-releases/prepared-remarks-sanders-on-the-senate-floor-what-the-oligarchs-really-want/). As I read Thoreau's statistic of 1/6th of America's population being chattel slaves, I concluded there must have been a considerably healthier middle class which also hinted that wealth inequality would have been less stark than it is today. This would also be obvious as wealth from physical assets and land has natural scaling limitations compared to digital platforms with integrated global markets. However, I incorrectly extrapolated from here that a power law distribution of wealth in Thoreau's era was unlikely. I could not have been more wrong.

Reliable [wealth by wealth percentile data for 2024 is easy to find](https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/dataviz/dfa/distribute/chart/#range:2009.4,2024.4) but less so for Thoreau's time; Claude generated some data without references for 1850s America whereas ChatGPT linked me to [this article](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1925000?saml_data=eyJpbnN0aXR1dGlvbklkcyI6WyIwMjIyZmFjMy1mZTBkLTRmMDAtYWNkOS1jNTg1ZDMyMTkyYTQiXSwic2FtbFRva2VuIjoiOTJiNzVlYzMtOTJjNy00ZDMwLWFkYzAtM2Y4NjI0OGI3MDY4In0&seq=1); I compared the data from Table 3 (which I hope I interpreted correctly) to the Claude's numbers and they held up quite well! What we see is a steep increase over time in wealth concentration at the top 1% and steep declines in the latter categories.

<div class="plot-container">
  <iframe src="/assets/plots/wealth_distribution.html" frameborder="0"></iframe>
  <div class="marginal-caption">Wealth Distribution Comparison: Thoreau's Era vs Modern Era</div>
</div>

What I did not know was the power demonstrated by slave ownership in this period. Census data on slave ownership in antebellum America provided by the [Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History](https://www.gilderlehrman.org/history-resources/teaching-resource/statistics-slaves-and-slaveholdings?utm_source=chatgpt.com), visualised below, suggests a power law - approximately 6.7% of white families owned 84% of all enslaved people and over 76.1% of white families owned no slaves at all. The slave ownership pattern using the red bars, I suppose, provides a proxy measure for economic stratification. The concentration of slave ownership in the 7-39 range accounts for 53% of enslaved people, suggesting a substantial "middle tier" of economic power. Perhaps this is one way to confirm my suspicion of a healthier sized middle class in Thoreau's times but maybe this is potentially reaching for too much.


<div class="plot-container">
  <iframe src="/assets/plots/slave_ownership.html" frameborder="0"></iframe>
  <div class="marginal-caption">Slave Ownership Distribution in the South (1860)</div>
</div>

I think users of the big technological platforms (me included) are at least somewhat responsible for the so called engine of the techno-capitalist machine. We are voting for their existence in the current form with our attention alongside our dollars. It should not surprise us to see the emergence of a non-virtuous oligotechnodemocracy, where a minority with technological power have been unwittingly majority elected into office. This is the critical difference between our times from those of Gandhi or Thoreau. Digital money taxes our income whereas digital media taxes our attention- this gives credence to the idea of an oligotechnodemocracy.

But this also shows us where our optionality lies from a Thoreauvian civil disobedience lens; with no obvious optionality in paying taxes to the government, our individual action should be concentrated on digital platforms. The emerging landscape of oligotechnodemocracy necessitates that the upset parties participate in some form of [[Digital Disobedience]]. But what is that exactly? Is it a disengagement from the digital? To me, it currently means an opportunity to act in the digital sphere of existence using the principles of Thoreau- disengaging from the ones that do not align with your values by choosing more seemingly conscionable platforms e.g., using Signal/BlueSky instead of WhatsApp/Twitter. But there are some obvious caveats here as these platforms have origin tales linked to the machine[^13] and, at some point, they could change their policies. Add to this that such platform migrations are not socially easy as they rely on one's networks migrating too. Deleting my Instagram and Facebook accounts (in 2016 and have managed to stay away from the two) has likely had significant ramifications on my social life[^15]. A couple years later, maybe in 2018, I deleted my WhatsApp account and was able to stay away from it until 2021[^16]. I think leaving the Meta ecosystem weakened my connections by a factor of 20 (1000 "friends" on Facebook to 300 contacts on WhatsApp to around 50 when I was only on Signal)- so, yes, there are downsides but I perhaps I retained mostly authentic friendships through the migration (and we would have probably stayed close under most circumstances). But, it is undeniably a simple, effective, and, most importantly, non-violent form of protest that eschews the engine of the techno-capitalists who also self-identify as as techno-optimists. Another tactic of protest I used was developing a (voice) messaging app. During this period, I could also see how easy it is to succumb to the idea of metrics such as increasing your user numbers etc. With this scaling, comes the need to organise into something more formal and potentially hierarchical as I couldn't imagine building the prototype app into a full-featured service that my friends had gotten used to. Again, if we were willing to chip in, we might have been able to sustain something. This period also exposed how much of the community around me, who complain about techno-capitalism, were merely arm-chair philosophers. However, it also showed that resistance is hard as there were too many dependencies on big technology for me to maintain this as a single developer with a full-time job in the academy. Despite this, I remain optimistic that, evenutally, BlueSky and Signal will become the lasting platforms as people become more aware of the pitfalls of big tech.
# Taxes for Techno-optimist Solutions to Natural Existential Threats
So what of taxes? Early on, Thoreau speaks of standing armies as an insurance paid by public tax to governments for protection against a nation's existential risk. Much of the expenditure of Western governments has continued in this existential risk mindset [with a new wave kicking off](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/clyrkkv4gd7o). However, I do not share the sentiment that developing technologies for war is the right defensive action- retaliating to cannibalism with cannibalism is not a conscionable and non-violent defensive action.

Historically, we have seen budget increases in space research when a national existential thread to national pride is at stake. However, since the end of the space race that defined the Apollo-era, NASA funding has dried up but the moment this pride is in question again, we will see some strategic funding emerge. It is interesting that these are examples of things we, humans, create and then perceive as threats to our species. Humanity is thus an existential threat to itself. It is our collective choice to turn our inventions towards harming others and, in turn, harming ourselves. While one answer is to stop engineering dangerous things, it is an insensible one. The other answer is, perhaps, to be found from Thoreau. We can choose to "just do things" based on conscience and morality, which are undoubtedly robust qualitative tools for decision-making than majority-led decisions.

Instead of defending us from each other, we can (and must) choose to protect and defend ourselves from the existential threats posed by nature, which is trying to kill us at every moment in our lives. These are either not wholly of our making or are out of our control. Such as the asteroid which had a [2.8% chance of striking Earth by 2032](https://www.esa.int/Space_Safety/Planetary_Defence/Asteroid_2024_YR4_no_longer_poses_significant_impact_risk). If we are so steadfastly committed to investing in defense, why not develop planetary defense systems that leverage our existing wartime capabilities to address these genuine existential risks? The economics are viable: defense contractors could adapt their capabilities to planetary defense with similar economic returns, as the required engineering, materials science, and physics expertise significantly overlaps. Some countries have advanced military technology development capabilities, and the underlying market dynamics—where some nations develop technologies that others purchase—could remain intact. Repurposing our strategy from national security to a pan-galactic security offers a path where technological capabilities developed for warfare are channeled toward species-level threats without economic disruption, maintaining the existing industrial base while serving a more conscionable purpose.

Human health is another example where governments could focus our taxes (and, to be fair, some are funding R&D in these areas). But this also means re-evaluating the production of fentanyl and other highly potent opioids provide. Ramping up research into novel non-addictive pain medications, including new drug classes that target pain pathways differently than opioids. Claude tells me that potent opioids like fentanyl remain necessary in some specific contexts (particularly for severe breakthrough cancer pain, certain surgical procedures, and palliative care) but they're no longer considered the only option for most pain management situations. Yet we persist with these medications so maybe either there is no incentive for us to make people healthy or death from natural causes is accepted as a reasonable existential risk. Or, maybe this will be put into action only when an increase in an lifespan addresses an individual's existential risk and that of their nation during war.

So, what I think of today when I hear "protection" is developing technologies to tackle death, illness, and aging. When I hear "defensive" technologies, I want to get behind the idea of defending ourselves from threats like asteroids and climate change. So, investing our taxes in such protection and defence is what I can get behind. Services that prop up this protective/defensive technology development will remain crucial too- investing in better education and housing seems obvious here.

With a combination of the right choices in the digital domain and by instructing governments to offer us the kind of protection we need- with advanced technology, we can solve problems that couldn't be done in Thoreau's times: eliminate natural existential threats from within the human body and outisde, from its environment, while investing the expansion of our minds for a greater collective flourishing.


[^1]: TIL, California and Texas were recent additions to the USA in the 1850's, during the Mexican war. This also reminded me of the American precdents of buying land from other countries. This historical context makes the potential purchases of Greenland and Gaza being mooted by Trump seem less absurd.

[^5]: Claude is the second book club member- an involuntary one.

[^6]: I was in a pub but I quickly got side-tracked into a conversation with Claude which made me realise I must first read Thoreau before ECD.

[^7]: Chattel slavery is a specific form of slavery where people are treated as the personal property (or "chattel") of an owner and can be bought, sold, and inherited like any other piece of property. The term "chattel" comes from the medieval Latin "capitale," meaning property or capital. Thoreau states that 1/6th of the population were chattel slaves. Until now, I thought that the number of slaves and owners in America would have been much closer to each other. But now, I am wondering how much India's colonial history biases my interpretation of the world: in this case, I was using the the minority British dominating the majority Indian group as an analogue (and incorrectly at that)

[^9]: I learned this from many years of sharing homes in communities across California and the UK in my 20s and 30s.

[^10]: I imagine businesses and sole traders can, but I sense that is, again, a small number.

[^11]: Companies like Apple, Google, Microsoft, and Meta have market capitalizations exceeding the GDP of many countries. Apple's market cap has exceeded $3 trillion, larger than the GDP of all but a handful of nations.

[^12]: Meta's platforms collectively serve billions of users—more "citizens" than any single nation. WeChat alone has over a billion users.

[^13]: It is important to caveat this by stating that even the alternatives are founded/funded, primarily, by players from within these unconscionable technology organisations.

[^14]: The claims that there is no slavery today hold some value. However, other insecure and restrictive forms of labour have been legalised by governments all over so this is worthy of deeper examination. I remember a friend once said the H1B visa was like "white-collar slavery". 

[^15]: Especially as a single man. A couple weekends ago, a lady of interest asked for my Instagram account. Why can't we just trade numbers...?

[^16]:  I learned how integral WhatsApp was when I got stuck in India when its second COVID wave announced. The UK was putting India on the red list for ten-day £3000 quarantines and I was trying to fly out within 3-4 hours. The only way to book a ticket happened to be via WhatsApp, which was the only way to speedily contact most of the travel agents.

[^17]: I mean that it should not disrupt the common person on the street; I do not buy into, for example, Extinction Rebellion's protests to shut down the tube. It disrupts the daily commuter more than the corporations, who are possibly just mildly irritated.

[^18]: SPOILER: He does end up in prison, which he describes in a very funny way in his essay. 

[^19]: So, in such a system, our employers are like an Uber or Amazon; a middle layer between governments and citizens.

[^20]: 
